From the New York Times, [music] I'm
Natalie Kitroof. This is the Daily.
[music]
After years of soaring optimism and
massive investment in [music] the AI
boom, in recent weeks, Wall Street has
begun to seriously question whether that
optimism was overblown and whether
[music] we're actually in a bubble that
may soon pop. And yet, despite all that
hand ringing, Silicon Valley [music] has
only doubled down, projecting total
confidence about the hundreds of
billions [music] of dollars it's pouring
into the technology.
Today, [music] my colleague Cade Mets
explains why. Why tech companies believe
so fervently in AI, why they're willing
to [music] take huge risks to deliver on
its promise, and whether that bet could
backfire.
>> [music]
>> It's Thursday, November 20th. [music]
Kade, it seems like the conversation on
Wall Street, among investors, in Silicon
Valley, even in Washington these days,
has gone from whether we're in an AI
bubble to the general sense that yes, we
probably are in some sort of a bubble.
And yet the companies that you cover
from your perch in Silicon Valley,
they're continuing to spend huge amounts
of cash on this. So [snorts]
explain to us what is their
justification for spending all this
money.
>> Well, 3 years after the arrival of chat
GPT, the open AI chatbot that really
started this AI boom, this is clearly a
powerful and in some ways transformative
technology. It's used not only to search
the internet in new ways. It can help
people do specific tasks in a faster and
more efficient way than they did in the
past. You see businesses adopting
services that can transcribe
meetings. You see other applications in
healthcare. There are ways that this
technology is already changing the way
we live and the way we work and these
companies and this is classic Silicon
Valley see much bigger transformations
on the horizon. These are people,
executives, these titans of industry are
looking not just at what is possible
today, but what they think this
technology will do in the future.
>> And the idea is that that future it's
going to be really expensive to build.
>> Well, fundamentally, this technology is
expensive to build. It's a mindbogling
amount of money even for people who have
spent decades in the tech industry. Open
AI alone has said it's going to spend
$500
billion dollar on data centers in the
United States alone to drive these
technologies. Let's stop for a second
and think about what that means. $500
billion in today's money could fund
about 15 Manhattan projects.
>> Wow.
>> It could fund the Apollo program two
times over.
>> The program that sent humans to space.
Yeah,
>> exactly. And that's just the money to
drive AI for a single startup, Open AI.
All told, if you look at what is being
spent across the globe, not just the US,
we're talking about nearly $3 trillion.
That's an awful lot of money for a
technology that is transformative
but is in many ways still speculative.
Meaning what they see in the future is
so big. They in many cases believe
they're building what is called in the
valley artificial general intelligence.
A machine that can do anything the human
brain can do. Can we just pause? I I
want you to just define this term for
me. Artificial general intelligence. We
hear it a lot. We've talked about it on
the show. It seems kind of hard to get
your head around. Like what does it mean
actually, Kate?
>> It's shorthand for a machine that can do
all of the economically valuable work
that people like you and I do on a daily
basis. They want to essentially replace
all human workers. They want to give the
world a technology that can do any job.
That in theory is worth all this
spending. But it's worth saying that we
don't know how to get to such a goal.
That is a lofty thing to reach for.
[music]
But so many Silicon Valley executives
remain undeterred. Mark Zuckerberg, CEO
of Meta.
>> I would guess that like sometime in the
next 12 to 18 months, we'll reach the
point where like most of the code that's
going towards these efforts is written
by AI.
>> Jensen Wang, the CEO of Nvidia.
>> If there's one thing that I would
encourage everybody to do is to go get
yourself an AI tutor right away. We're
going to become superhumans because we
have super AIs.
>> They are all making the case that
[music] this spending makes sense.
The poster child of this attitude is Sam
Alman, CEO of Open AAI.
>> There are not many times that [music] I
want to be a public company, but one of
the rare times it's appealing is when
those people are writing these
ridiculous OpenAI is about to go out of
business and you know, whatever. I would
love to tell them they could just short
the stock and I would love to see them
get burned on that. He has told the rest
of the world to bet against his company
at their own risk and he continues to
flaunt the company's spending. He and
the rest of the industry are all in,
[music]
but what they promised hasn't been
delivered on the timeline that they
promised. So again, just explain why
they're still going even harder at this
thing if it isn't panning out yet.
Obviously, they aren't trying to throw
money in the trash, right?
>> Do you know about the concept of FOMO,
fear of missing out? That's a lot of
what is driving this.
>> Do I ever?
>> No one wants to miss out on what could
be the most transformative technology
the world has ever seen.
>> And if you don't want to miss out on
that, you have to make your bet now.
these data centers, not only are they
expensive, they take a long time to
build. And so almost by definition, you
have to make a bet on something that's
years down the road. But there may be a
disconnect between the money that's
being spent now and what is possible
just a few years down the road. What
you're saying is that the upside for
these companies of taking this massive
gamble on what is essentially, as you've
described it, a moonshot of reaching
artificial general intelligence is that
you might be the company that lands on
the moon. The downside though is what if
these companies are wrong? What if there
is no moon landing?
>> What if there's no moon landing? Or what
if only one company lands on the moon?
or what if only two uh land there and
the rest are left hanging. This is a
situation where even if somebody wins, a
lot of people are going to lose. Uh Sam
Alman, the chief executive of OpenAI,
said as much during a dinner I attended
here in San Francisco this summer. He
said rhetorically, "Are we in a phase
where investors as a whole are over
excited about AI?" In my opinion, he
said yes. He acknowledged
that a lot of this spending was at least
in some ways irrational. And he said
that there would be losers in this
scenario. After this dinner which made
headlines across the country and across
the world, a lot of people started using
the word bubble. And when I talk to
people here in Silicon Valley and
financial analysts and tech historians
about this moment we're living through,
what they often point back to is the dot
bubble of the late 90s and 2000s when
early internet technologies showed
enormous promise and the valley started
to invest enormous amounts of money in
it. Okay, let's talk about the.com
bubble and and specifically what's
different and what's similar to the
moment that we're in now with AI.
>> Well, for people who live through the
bubble, what they often think of is an
enormous number of startups that were
created and that went public and had
huge valuations even though they had
little or no business model, certainly
no revenues. And then when the market
crashed, when people decided that the
spending was getting ahead of what was
possible, a lot of those companies went
out of business. Companies like Cosmo
that delivered goods straight to your
door, Pets.com, which sent you pet food.
There are famous examples of this, and
that's often what people think of. But
underneath that, and this is where the
analogy really holds up to today, as
those startups were being built, there
were other companies that were building
the infrastructure needed to drive the
internet, that were spending enormous
amounts of money to lay the fiber optic
cable that would carry all that
information across the internet to our
machines. when the bubble burst, a lot
of those companies went bankrupt. And
that's often what people are thinking
about uh as they look back at the dotcom
bubble.
>> Meaning there's a fear that the
companies that are laying the fiber
optics of the AI revolution, which is,
you know, the analogy would say these
data centers that are housing all of
these chips, that those companies could
go under. That's the fear. Just like
then you have companies spending
enormous amounts of money on the
infrastructure needed to drive on this.
The difference is they are spending a
lot more today than they did 25 years
ago.
>> But I'm struck by the fact Kate that
obviously the dot bubble it burst but
there were many many winners right. I
mean, we still have, as you said, a lot
of these companies that were born in
that era. So, what's the takeaway there?
>> This is a great point. So many of the
applications that were promised by all
those startups that went out of business
are part of our daily lives today.
Amazon delivers our pet food. Other
companies deliver our real time internet
video. So many of the things that were
promised then we have today and we're
actually using that fiber optic cable
that was laid and it sat there dormant
for many years and we are now reaping
the benefits. It's just that it didn't
happen as quickly as a lot of people
thought. So for Silicon Valley, it
sounds like the lesson of that bubble
could very easily be, sure, some people
lose in a situation like that, but
broadly the bet on the internet was
worth it. It paid off, so take the bet.
So many people I talked to say that very
thing.
[music]
They point out that in the end, despite
the bubble bursting, eventually
everything turned out as promised. They
make that analogy and that's why they're
making these enormous bets today. They
acknowledge there might be losers, as
Sam Alman did during that dinner, but
they [music] think it's going to work
out in the end.
The concern however among some in the
valley and some in New York where the
financial analysts are [music] is that
the risk being taken on by some
companies is far larger than in the
[music] past. And if that's the case and
the bubble bursts again, the fallout
could be far more significant. [music]
We'll be right back.
Okay, Cade, let's get into the scary
thing that you brought up before the
break, that the risks here could be much
more significant. Talk to me about that.
Well, as I discuss this with all sorts
of people, including technologists, but
also financial analysts, the other thing
that often comes up is the housing
bubble of the late 2000s, which was a
much more serious thing.
People generally agree that this is not
what we're going through at the moment.
Let's not go that far. That said, they
do point out that there are elements
that we're seeing now that were also
present then.
>> What are those elements? What what's
worrying them?
>> Basically, this is about the enormous
amount of debt that is being taken on to
build these data centers, the enormous
amount of money that's being borrowed to
build them. And as you look at that
debt, it's hard to know how much there
is and who is holding the debt. If that
debt is spread across a lot of
companies, then you have more systemic
risk. You have greater risk that could
damage the rest of the economy.
>> Right? That was the thing that made the
2008 crash so bad. the amount of debt
that had piled up under the housing
market. But these tech companies,
they're some of the richest corporations
in the world. So why are they financing
the AI boom with debt? Why is that
happening?
>> Well, some companies are not taking on
debt to do this. Some companies like
Google and Microsoft and Meta pull in
billions of dollars in revenue every
year. They can afford to essentially pay
cash for these giant data centers. But
there's so much interest in AI. There's
so much demand for the computing power
that comes out of these data centers
that [snorts] we're seeing all sorts of
other companies build these giant
facilities when they don't have the
money to do it.
Even relatively big companies like
Oracle, the cloud computing giant, is
having to take on debt to build data
centers. And then you have all these
smaller companies that most people on
Earth have never heard of with names
like Cororeweave, Lambda, and Nebus.
>> Definitely never heard of them.
>> They are certainly taking on debt to do
this. Cororeweave, a company based in
the New York, New Jersey area, has told
financial analysts that for every $5
billion in data center infrastructure
they build, they have to take on almost
$3 billion in debt.
>> Whoa.
>> In the end, they think that they will
pull in the revenues needed to pay back
those debts. But ultimately, if the AI
technology does not pull in the money,
then you can't repay those debts, and
that's when you have a problem.
>> Got it. And I was struck by something
else that you said, Kade, which is that
when you look at the debt here, it's
actually hard to know how much of it
there is. What's that about? Why Why
don't we know that?
>> Well, some of the debt is taken on in
the way you might think. These companies
go to a bank and they borrow the money
and you know exactly who lent it, who
borrowed it, how much it is. But
increasingly, we're seeing other deals
where it's hard to see where the debt is
and how much of it there is. A lot of
the money is being lent by what are
called private credit institutions.
[snorts]
legally you can't see inside these
companies. The other thing that's
happening is you're seeing the rise of
these securities. They call them
assetbacked securities.
Something that came up during the
housing bubble that people may be
familiar with.
>> Reminiscent in a not great way.
>> These securities can be bought and sold
and traded. And that means you don't
know in the end who is holding the debt.
>> [snorts]
>> You're saying there's this idea, right,
that there could be real systemic risk
baked into all this debt, that the
leverage in the system is just hard to
pin down. [clears throat] And so, we
really can't actually know at this point
how exposed we all might be to it.
>> That's right. The key word there is
could. There could be a problem. It's
hard to know,
>> right? It's obviously a really murky
thing, but is there anything that we
know definitively about the magnitude of
the debt in the system? About how big
we're talking?
>> As I said earlier, it's projected that
companies across the world will spend
nearly $3 trillion on these data
centers. Analysts at Morgan Stanley
project that about a third of that will
be debt. $1 trillion.
Wow. [snorts] Just pulling back from
what you're saying, it sounds like it's
actually quite hard to know what kind of
bubble we may be in right now and how
bad or not bad it may be. I mean,
there's the dot example, right, which
had fallout, but it sounds like was
relatively contained and produced all
these winners. And then there's the much
riskier version of things closer to
elements of things that we saw during
the housing crisis that could have a
much broader effect. And because of all
that's unknowable in all this, we can't
really tell. Is that right?
>> We can't. If things do burst, it's hard
to even know when that might happen. And
people like Sam Alman and Sundar Pachai,
the CEO of Alphabet, the Google parent
company, have acknowledged this
uncertainty. You know, there's this
irony that I've been thinking about in
all this, which is that in some ways,
the worst case scenario for the
companies that are invested in the AI
boom, right, is that they never actually
reach AGI, that point where computers
replace human workers on mass, where AI
becomes as smart as the human brain, or
that that really takes a very long time.
But I think there's a lot of us human
workers who might actually view that
worst case scenario for Silicon Valley
as a relief. Like people might be happy
generally to hear that we aren't going
to be replaced on mass tomorrow. And I
wonder what you make of that tension,
the fact that the future that they're
building toward here may not actually be
a future that all that many people
actually want.
It's a great point. As we think about
this moment, we need to realize the
realities of this technology. It is very
powerful in many ways. healthc care
being perhaps the prime example, drug
discovery,
we are on the path towards some amazing
things. At the same time, we're on the
path towards some things that are
concerning.
If things don't progress at the pace
that Silicon Valley says, this could
cause problems across the larger
economy. as we talked about,
but it might give us the time we need to
continue to think about all the big
questions that hang over this technology
and that hang over our future.
It might give us time to prepare for
that future.
>> Well, Cade, thank you so much.
>> Glad to be here. [music]
On Wednesday afternoon, Nvidia announced
that in the most recent quarter, its
profit was $ 31.9 billion, [music] up
65% from a year ago. And it reported
record sales.
The news buoyed its shares in
aftermarket trading and was seen as a
sign the jitters on Wall Street over AI
had been calmed, at least for now.
We'll be right back. Here's [music]
what else you should know today. On
Wednesday, President Trump announced on
[music] social media that he'd signed
legislation calling on the Justice
Department to release its files on
Jeffrey Epstein [music] within 30 days.
But Trump's signature doesn't guarantee
the release of all the files. The bill
contains significant exceptions,
including a provision that allows
[music] records to be withheld if they
jeopardize an active federal
investigation.
Last week, Trump demanded [music] that
the Justice Department launch an
investigation into Democrats mentioned
in some of the files, and Attorney
General Pam Bondi said [music] she'd
started one. That could give the
administration another reason to
withhold documents. [music]
And in a remarkable hearing on
Wednesday, a federal judge grilled
government prosecutors [music]
pursuing charges against former FBI
director James Comey, revealing serious
vulnerabilities in their case. In
response [music] to the judge's
questioning, Lindseay Halligan, the US
attorney handpicked by Trump to bring
the case, [music]
admitted she'd never shown the second
and final version of the Comey [music]
indictment to the full grand jury before
the four person signed the charging
document. Comey's lawyers immediately
seized on that irregularity, [music]
saying it justified dismissing the case
entirely.
The judge didn't immediately rule on
Comey's [music] claim that the case had
been filed as an act of retribution by
Trump, but he seemed to be leaning in
that direction [music] and in favor of
throwing out the charges altogether. The
dismissal would be a humiliation [music]
for Trump's Justice Department in a
prosecution that's appeared to be slap
dash from its [music] very inception.
Today's episode [music] was produced by
Ricky Novetski, Shannon Lynn, and Carlos
Prito. It was edited by Mark [music]
George and Lisa Chow. Contains music by
Dan Powell and Marian Lozano and was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
[music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroof. See [music] you tomorrow.